Geologists use special mapping tools including Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
The study of geology also includes studying the ocean floor.
Some rocks are not solids such as mud and sand.
Geologists place rocks into three different categories: sedimentary rocks, igneous rocks, and metamorphic rocks.
Sedimentary rocks are made when different fragments or segments from other rock types get compacted together.
Igneous rocks are formed when magma cools and hardens.
Metamorphic rocks form when other rock types melt and harden again.
Rocks are constantly changing and most begin as one rock type and end up being another.
The process by which rocks change from one type to another is called the rock cycle.
Weathering is a process that breaks down rocks and can be caused by rain, ice, wind, and chemicals.
Mt. Rushmore is made out of a big igneous rock.
Sometimes lightning strikes the sand on the beach and causes it to form a rock with a glassy appearance.
Magma is actually melted rock.
A group of minerals held together make up rocks.
Diamonds are the hardest minerals.
Diamonds and rubies are forms of crystals.
Snow flakes, which form in the clouds, are considered ice crystals.
Crystals are used in quartz watches and serve as the mechanism that gives the watch accurate time.
Salt crystals forms when water evaporates from a saltwater mixture.
There are many shapes that can form in a crystal including rectangles, triangles, or squares.
The shape of a crystal is determined by the elements it is made of and its chemical bonds.
A person who studies crystals is called a crystallographer.
Some living organisms have the ability to produce crystals.
Many believe that crystals have healing abilities because they are able to stimulate the bodies' energy.
Although crystals typically grow naturally, they are sometimes produced by scientists in a lab under controlled conditions.
Not only do crystals have sharp edges but they also consist of flat faces called facets.
Bedrock is made of high concentrations of crystals.
Most solids only form one type of crystal but there are some that can produce multiple crystals forms.
Almost all crystals have some type of imperfection where the pattern of shapes is distorted.
There are four types of crystals: covalent, metallic, molecular and ionic.
Dolomite is used to make the medicine application magnesia which is commonly used as a laxative.
Rare, hot pink varieties of dolomite can be found in the Congo in Africa.
Dolomite is used to manufacture magnesium salts.
Dolomite is a good addition to soil to decrease its acid levels.
Dolomite is actually a type of limestone.
Although dolomite can be found in sedimentary and metamorphic rock, it is rarely seen in metamorphic rock.
Dolomite is used in the manufacturing of bricks that are used to produce steel.
Dolomite received its named after a French mineralogist named Deodat de Dolomieu.
Dolomite can be found in large, thick areas called dolomite beds.
The Dolomite Problem refers to the issue that scientists have on how dolomite beds originated.
Dolomite does not form on the Earth's surface; it forms underground in ancient rock.
The manufacture of cement, pavement, and concrete utilize dolomite.
The distinguishing characteristic between limestone and dolomite is that dolomite will not bubble when introduced to an acid.
The Dolomites are a mountain range in Italy that is made of dolomite rock.
Dolomite can be taken as a supplement for calcium or magnesium.
There are millions of earthquakes each year.
Currently, there is no way to scientifically predict an earthquake.
A seismograph is used to determine the intensity of an earthquake.
A tsunami is the result of an underwater earthquake or volcanic eruption.
The point on the Earth's surface where the earthquake originates is called the epicenter.
The intensity of an earthquake is measured on the Richter scale.
Seismic waves are the waves produced by an earthquake and are most likely responsible for damage.
If the Earth were hollow, people on one side of the Earth would feel earthquakes from the other side of Earth.
The most powerful earthquake ever recorded had a magnitude of 9.5 and occurred in Chile.
Even though the majority of earthquakes occur naturally, some are triggered by volcanic activity.
There are 20, moving tectonic plates that have the potential to cause an earthquake.
In the US, Alaska has more earthquakes than any other state.
The majority of the life that lost in an earthquake is due to falling buildings.
An earthquake in the Indian Ocean was able to generate enough power to use across the globe for 3 days.
Although earthquakes occur in both hemispheres, the northern hemisphere experiences more.
Pure fluorite is colorless. When fluorite is colored it is because of various impurities.
Fluorite is used to lower the melting point of metal during the production of aluminum.
Fluorite glows when it is exposed to UV light.
Although fluorite can be seen in virtually all the primary colors, it is mostly commonly found in yellow, green, blue, or purple.
Some fluorite is ceramic-like and is therefore used to make cookware.
Fluorite is used during jewelry making especially with beads.
Microscope manufacturers use fluorite in the production of its lenses.
Naturally occurring fluorine gas was recently discovered near fluorite mines in Germany.
Some fluorite has a multicolored or banded appearance.
Fluorite serves as the best source for elemental fluorine.
Sometimes the impurities of colored fluorite can be fixed changing it back to pure, colorless fluorite.
Because of its soft texture, fluorite is used in carving.
The word fluorite originates from the Latin word fluere which means "to flow".
Fluorite is commonly transparent.
Fluorite is often found in limestone.
The majority of fossils are found within sedimentary rocks.
Fossil beds are public places that allow anyone to look for and collect their own fossils.
Because sedimentary rocks are used to construct buildings, fossils can sometimes be found within the structure of buildings.
Most organisms do not leave fossils when they die because most of their parts either decay or are destroyed.
The best ways for an organism to become a fossil is if it is buried alive or is buried soon after dying.
Fossils can exist as parts of an organism or traces of an organism such as a footprint or a burrow.
Petrified fossils are fossils where the bone and other living material have been replaced by deposited minerals.
Most dinosaur fossils are actually petrified fossils.
A mold is a type of fossil that occurs when the hard parts of a buried organism dissolve and leaves a hole.
When minerals fill molds, it forms another type of fossil called a cast.
When waste materials from an animal form a fossil, it is called a coprolite.
Imprints are molds of thin objects such as leaves.
Some fossils of organisms contain the original matter. These fossils are called unchanged fossils.
A lot of unchanged fossils are found in tar pits, amber, and ice.
Trace fossils such as tracks and footprints give clues about animals' size and shape.
Geologists use special mapping tools including Geographic Information Systems (GIS).
The study of geology also includes studying the ocean floor.
Some rocks are not solids such as mud and sand.
Geologists place rocks into three different categories: sedimentary rocks, igneous rocks, and metamorphic rocks.
Sedimentary rocks are made when different fragments or segments from other rock types get compacted together.
Igneous rocks are formed when magma cools and hardens.
Metamorphic rocks form when other rock types melt and harden again.
Rocks are constantly changing and most begin as one rock type and end up being another.
The process by which rocks change from one type to another is called the rock cycle.
Weathering is a process that breaks down rocks and can be caused by rain, ice, wind, and chemicals.
Mt. Rushmore is made out of a big igneous rock.
Sometimes lightning strikes the sand on the beach and causes it to form a rock with a glassy appearance.
Magma is actually melted rock.
A group of minerals held together make up rocks.
Diamonds are the hardest minerals.
Gneiss is distinctive among other rocks that have bands because its minerals are not evenly distributed so the bands are various widths.
Under appropriate conditions, gneiss can be recrystallized into granite.
There is gneiss in Canada that date back 4 billion years.
Gneiss is so abundant on the lower level of the Earth's crust that if you drill anywhere on the surface, you will eventually strike gneiss.
Gneiss is said to be a German word meaning sparkling or bright.
Gneiss rock is further characterized by its alternating light and dark bands of minerals.
Gneiss forms from volcanic rock, shale, or granitic.
Quartz is typically abundantly found in gneiss.
The bands that form on gneiss rock are due to the various rocks that are a part of its make-up.
The use of the word gneiss dates back to the mid-1700s.
Gneiss rocks that originate as sedimentary rock are called paragneiss and those originating as igneous rock are called orthogneiss.
Limestone can change into calcareous gneiss which contains calcium carbonate.
Gneiss and schist are often confused but gneiss has more of a coarse texture and does not cleave.
Some of the oldest rocks found on Earth are gneisses.
Gneiss has also been used to construct buildings and gravestones.
The word gypsum is derived from the Greek word gypsos which means chalk or plaster.
Gypsum has five basic forms: selenite, satin spar, alabaster, rock gypsum, and gypsite.
The most common form of gypsum is rock gypsum.
There is a large sand dune in New Mexico made of gypsum sand.
Because gypsum contains water molecules, it can be easily hydrated and dehydrated making it very versatile.
Gypsum is a main ingredient in plaster of Paris which is used to make casts and sculptures.
Benjamin Franklin introduced the mining of gypsum to the US.
Gypsum was used by the ancient Greeks, Romans, and Egyptians for a variety of uses such as making sculptures and for mortar in pyramids.
The Plaster War was fought in the 1800s to allow farmers to legally transport gypsum to use as a fertilizer.
Some of the largest gypsum crystals ever found were in Mexico and weighed 55 tons.
Gypsum has been discovered on Mars which further proves that water could exist on the planet.
The White Sands National Monument is the largest gypsum sand dune and can be seen from outer space.
Gypsum is used to make cement and paint fillers.
Gypsum is great in gardening because it reduces the salt content of the soil while also adding other nutrients.
Gypsum is so soft that you could scratch it with your fingernail.
Although halite is typically colorless, it can be a broad spectrum of colors depending on its impurities.
Halite is typically found in underground salt beds.
Canada is the world's largest salt consumer.
Halite is often used as a deicer on driveways and roads because it causes ice to melt.
Halite is used as a seasoning for food and is pleasant to the taste.
Halite can be purchased at almost every grocery store and also hardware stores.
Halite in the form of rock salt is usually mined underground.
Rock salt deposits are usually the result of an ancient sea of water that evaporated.
Table salt comes from the evaporation of ponds that have collected sea water.
Halite can be used to keep away unwanted animals.
A form of halite, rock salt, can be used to make ice cream if mixed with the ice by lowering the freezing point of the ice and causing the cream to freeze.
Rock salt is used as a treatment to many ailments such as upset stomach, irritation from insect bites, and symptoms of the common cold.
Rock salt is helpful as a detox for the body as it helps get rid of deposited minerals and salts.
Halite is essential for the human body to function.
Twenty-seven percent of the salt in our bodies is located in our bones.
Scientists have stated that there are over 3,000 different types of minerals.
When two or more minerals combine together, they form a rock.
The most common mineral found on Earth is called quartz.
All minerals are inorganic because they are made of nonliving particles.
Minerals are always solid and have a distinctive geometric shape called a crystalline structure.
Each kind of mineral has the same set of chemicals in its make-up.
The mineral quartz always contains two oxygen atoms for every silicon atom.
Mineral crystals are so small that they can only be viewed under a microscope.
The cooling process of magma determines the size of the crystals that form in a mineral.
When magma cools at a slow rate, large mineral crystals are produced.
When magma cools at a fast rate, small mineral crystals are produced.
Olivine is a mineral often used to cast objects in aluminum.
The minerals our bodies need are different from the minerals found on Earth. Our body actually needs the elements found within the minerals.
The mineral feldspar covers about 60% of the Earth's crust and is used in the making of ceramics.
Plagioclase is a mineral within the same family as the mineral feldspar and is used to identify the origin of igneous rocks.
Quartz has many different names which are dependent upon their color.
Large quartz is mined in Brazil.
Quartz weighing 90,000 lbs. has been mined in Brazil.
Quartz is the second most commonly found mineral on Earth.
There are many uses for quartz because it can conduct electricity under pressure.
Quartz is commonly used in spiritual practices.
Some people believe quartz has magical powers and has the ability to promote growth in a garden or to attract certain energies into the home.
Quartz is made up of silicon and oxygen.
Quartz is used to make the internal parts of watches.
Quartz is so abundant that almost every rock contains at least a small amount of it.
Because quartz is clear, it is often used in the production of glass.
Because it contains pure silicon, quartz is used to make many computer components.
People in Ireland and other countries used quartz to make stone tools in prehistoric times.
Quartz is often used in the fashion industry especially in jewelry making.
Although variations of quartz come in many colors, pure quartz is clear.
Quartzite is the result of sandstone and the mineral quartz being put under extreme heat and pressure.
At least ninety percent of a quartzite rock is quartz.
Quartzite is usually white or a light shade of pink or gray.
Mountains and hillsides are typical places to find quartzite.
Quartzite tends to be smooth with a grainy and lustrous appearance.
The purest form of silica found on Earth can be found in quartzite.
Bricks and other strong building material are made of quartzite.
Quartzite tends to be very strong and thick so it is taken from the Earth's surface rather than mined underground.
The shade of quartzite is dependent upon the amount of iron oxide that is present.
Hilltops made of quartzite usually do not change because quartzite is resistant to weathering.
The bedding around railroad tracks often contains quartzite because of its durability.
Quartzite is very versatile in construction and is used as flooring, decorative wall coverings, and roofing.
During the Stone Age when flint was not available, quartzite was often used as a replacement.
Quartzite can be found in many countries including Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Because of the high amount of silica in quartzite, the soil around the developing quartzite does not have enough nutrients to sustain vegetation.
Schist and slate are very similar in that they are made from the same rock types except schist is subjected to more heat and pressure.
Schist is often referred to as schistosity because of its large mica flakes.
Large crystals cause schist rocks to reflect lots of light which gives it a very shiny appearance.
The large crystals in schist indicate the amount of pressure and temperature that was used to make the rock.
Specific schist rocks are named for the dominant mineral that is a part of its make-up.
Schist is derived from a German word meaning to split.
Most schist rocks originate as some type of clay or mud.
Most schist contains the mineral mica and is called mica schist.
Schist is often used as a guide to measure specific sizes and dimensions of objects.
Before the 18th century, schist, shale, and slate were used interchangeably to describe the same rock.
There are various features that distinguish schist rocks made from sedimentary rocks or those made from igneous.
Schist can be found in many countries including Brazil, parts of the US and Ireland.
Schist has been previously used to make decorative rock walls.
Presently, schist is used as a decorative stone as well as for jewelry.
In Australia, houses that were built using schist in the 1800s are still standing today.
Roughly 70% of the Earth's surface is covered by shale.
Shale rock can form in playas, rivers, basins, and oceans.
It is common to find limestone and sandstone lying near shale.
Shale usually forms in sheets.
Roughly 55% of all sedimentary rock is shale.
Some shale is high in calcium content because of the fossils they possibly house.
Shale that has a high content of alumina is used to manufacture cement.
Shale that has a high content of natural gas has been recently used as an energy source.
Quartz and other minerals are typically found in shale.
Although shale is normally gray, it can be black if it contains a lot of carbonaceous material.
About 95% of the organic material that is located inside of sedimentary rock is located inside of shale or mudrocks.
Shale is formed through a process called compaction.
Shale that is exposed to extreme heat and pressure can change into slate.
After formation, shale is usually deposited into lakes and rivers by slow moving water.
Clay is a key component in shale rock.
Slate is mostly made of clay but the clay can change to mica under extreme degrees of pressure.
The color of slate is largely determined by the amount of iron it contains, but it is normally a shade of gray.
Slate normally forms in basins between convergent plate boundaries.
Often, slate is used to describe shale but the two are different in that shale is actually converted into slate.
Slate is used for different varieties of flooring and roofing.
School children used pieces of slate as a writing board to practice their math and writing during the 1800s.
Slate can easily be broken into neat, thin sheet because of its foliation.
The majority of mined slate is used for roofing because it does not absorb a lot of water and can withstand freezing air.
Slate is very expensive to make and install.
Chalk boards are made of slate and chalk is made of limestone, another type of rock.
Slate is used to make turkey calls which are devices that mimic the sound of different turkeys and used by hunters.
Slate has a wet-like appearance when exposed to the sun.
Slate is produced worldwide but the best slate is said to come from certain countries such as Brazil and the United Kingdom.
Slate can be found in various places such as on the sides of cliffs, underground, and in pits.
Slate normally is formed from a sedimentary rock.
Volcanoes tell us what is inside the Earth's crust.
Magma is molten rock inside the volcano and lava is when the molten rock comes out of the volcano.
The Ring of Fire is a ring of volcanoes that circle the Pacific Ocean.
In order for a volcano to erupt, it must be over a hot spot.
Over 75% of the world's volcanoes are located in the Ring of Fire.
Volcanoes can form over mantle plumes which are areas of hot rock under the surface of the Earth.
There are volcanoes on the ocean floor that create new sea floor.
An erupting volcano can cause other natural disasters such as earthquakes and tsunamis to occur.
Eruptions are what cause a volcano to get bigger.
There are three different categories of volcanoes: active, dormant, and extinct.
An extinct volcano is one that has not erupted in a very long time and is not expected to ever erupt again.
Earth has over 1500 active volcanoes.
The largest active volcano is the Mauna Loa in Hawaii which is over 13, 600 feet above sea level.
Ninety percent of the world's earthquakes occur along the Ring of Fire.
Mount Fuji is the tallest mountain in Japan and is also a dormant volcano.
The temperature of the inner core is believed to be approximately 5400 degrees Celsius, or 5700 Kelvin. This heat is caused by three elements: residual heat from the formation of the earth, gravitational forces from the moon and the sun, and and radioactive decay of earth's inner elements.
The nickel alloy that makes up the earth's inner core is referred to as NiFe. Ni represents nickel, and Fe represents iron.
Scientists believe that the earth's inner core is growing slowly. It is also not believed to be uniform, as the seismic waves passing through do so at different speeds.
Some believe that the earth's inner core formed between 2 and 4 billion years ago. This theory also states that it was entirely molten originally, and was not present when the earth originally formed 4.5 billion years ago.
The earth's inner core is approximately 1500 miles wide. It is estimated to be approximately 1,802 miles below the earth's surface (crust).
Some scientists believe that the earth's inner core spins at a faster speed than the rest of it - at a rate of 2/3rds of a second faster.
Earth's magnetic field is not created by its solid iron and nickel inner core. Instead it is created by the earth's outer core, made of molten iron and nickel. The magnetic field is created when the outer core flows around the inner core.
Some find it hard to believe that the inner core can be solid, considering how hot it is. This inner core is able to remain solid because the center of the earth exists in extremely high pressures.
Although the inner core is made up primarily of nickel and iron, it also includes elements that are capable of dissolving in iron such as cobalt, gold, and platinum. These elements are called siderophiles.
Some scientists believe that the earth's inner core actually has another inner-inner core. They believe it formed approximately 500 million years ago due to a geological change.
In addition to seismic activity, scientists use a variety of other information to learn about the earth's inner core. These additional methods involve lab experiments, meteorite analysis, computer modeling, and reading of data.
The inner core makes up approximately 1.7% of earth's total mass, while the outer core makes up approximately 30.8% of the earth's total mass.
The word diamond is derived from a Greek word "Adamas' that means 'indestructible and unconquerable'.
Ancient Greeks believed that diamonds were actually little stars that had fallen to the earth's surface, or that they were tears of the Greek gods.
Ancient Romans wore diamonds to ward off evil - something they learned from Indian mythology. They also believed that Cupid's arrows had diamond tips.
In ancient times diamonds were worn to promote courage, invincibility, and strength.
In the Middle Ages it was believed that diamonds had healing abilities, and that they could cure mental illness.
Diamonds often come to the surface of the earth following volcanoes that push them upwards.
Most diamonds are between 1 billion and 3 billion years old, but some may be older still.
When a diamond is cut and polished it loses approximately 50% of its original weight.
The diamond is the birthstone for people that are born in April.
The first diamonds were discovered in India, followed by Brazil.
In France in the 1200s only the King was permitted to wear diamonds.
Although originally found in India, Brazil and various African countries, diamonds are also now being discovered in Canada, Australia, China, and Tanzania.
While popular for jewelry, 80% of the mined diamonds are used for industrial purposes, because of their hardness.
The first record of a man giving a woman a diamond dates to 1477 when Austria's Archduke gave Mary of Burgundy a diamond.
Diamonds can be different colors ranging from colorless to black. They can be yellow, pink, red, orange, blue, green, and brown.
The term 'blood diamond' refers to diamonds that are sourced from unstable regions, when the diamonds are mined in unsafe conditions, resulting in deaths and murder, and when the money earned from the diamonds is used to finance war.
The movie Blood Diamond, starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Connelly brought the issue of blood diamonds to the public's attention, helping to change some of these practices.
There are four very famous diamonds including the Hope Diamond (45.53 carat), the Tiffany Yellow Diamond (128.54 carats), the Koh-i-Noor, and the Regent Diamond on display at the Louvre (140.64 carats).
Diamonds are the most popular gem for wedding jewelry.
Synthetic diamonds can be made through detonation synthesis, chemical vapour deposition, and high-temperature high-pressure synthesis.
The word lithosphere is derived from the Greek words 'litho' which means 'rocky', and 'sphaira' which means 'sphere'.
A.E.H. Love, a mathematician, was the first to describe the concept of the earth's structure consisting of an outer layer in 1911 in his monograph titled "Some problems of Geodynamics".
A geologist named Joseph Barrell took Love's theory further and recognized that the continental crust had both an upper solid crust and an underlying layer that was semi-molten. He called the semi-molten layer the asthenosphere, and the upper solid crust the lithosphere. He based his theories on the fact that there were gravity anomalies over the earth's continental crust.
The oceanic lithosphere is between 5 to 10 miles thick.
The continental lithosphere is approximately 22 miles thick, although it can reach 37 miles under certain mountain ranges.
The continental lithosphere is billions of years old while the oceanic lithosphere is much younger and is constantly being created from mantle material at mid-ocean ridges.
The lithosphere's main plates include the African Plate, the Antarctic Plate, the Eurasian Plate, the Indo-Australian Plate, the North American Plate, the South American Plate, and the Pacific Plate.
Smaller but important plates include the Arabian Plate, the Caribbean Plate, the Cocos Plate, Indian Plate, the Juan de Fuca Plate, the Nazca Plate, the Philippine Sea Plate, and the Scotia Plate.
When a continental plate and an oceanic plate come together the oceanic plate sinks below the continental plate.
It is from the lithosphere that we are able to extract natural resources such as coal, various fuels, and metals. It is also important for plants, providing the minerals required for their growth.
The continental lithosphere is comprised of igneous rock called felsic rock. This rock is rich in the elements required to form quartz and feldspar.
The oceanic lithosphere is comprised of mafic crust and ultramafic mantle. The mafic crust is made up of silicate mineral that is rich in iron and magnesium. The ultramafic crust is made up of Peridotite which is made up of olivine and pyroxene - contained less than 45% silica.
The lithosphere is the location where all earthquakes on earth occur, because an earthquake occurs when tectonic plates shift or collide.
When a continental plate and oceanic plate collide, the continental plate scrapes off the oceanic plate's top layers, which are called terranes.
There are 17 terranes located in the San Francisco Bay region, a result of the movement that has occurred along the San Andreas Fault line in California.
The word emerald is derived from the Greek word 'smaragdus' which means 'green gem'.
The emerald is the birthstone for the month of May.
The emerald is often considered to be the gemstone for the Taurus, Gemini, and Cancer astrological signs.
In the United States, a couple's 55th wedding anniversary is celebrated with an emerald gift.
Emeralds often have many inclusions (imperfections) which makes them a weaker stone and more difficult to make into jewelry.
Emeralds without inclusions (imperfections) are rare and more difficult to find. These rare emeralds are also worth a lot more than diamonds.
Because emeralds have a lower density, a 1 carat emerald is larger than a carat diamond.
In order to help preserve an emerald and stop it from chipping or cracking they are often filled with a type of oil or with resin epoxy.
Emeralds are made of beryl. This is also what makes the aquamarine gemstone, but emeralds get their color from small amounts of vanadium and chromium.
There are emeralds believed to be 2.97 billion years old.
Cleopatra loved emeralds and they were considered to be one of her favorite stones.
Ancient folklore suggested that putting an emerald under your tongue would make it possible to see the future.
There is an emerald weighing 1,383.93 carats. It is called the Duke of Devonshire Emerald. It is an uncut emerald.
In 1935 synthetic emeralds were created for the first time. Rubies and sapphires had been synthetically created since 1907.
It can be difficult to tell the difference between a real emerald and a synthetic emerald, which makes it a commonly faked gemstone. They even put cracks in the fake ones to make them look real.
In 1997 emeralds were discovered in the Yukon Territory.
Elizabeth Taylor once owned an emerald necklace that sold in 2011 for $6.5 million. It was more than 23 carats.
In the United States emeralds have been found in South Carolina, North Carolina, Nevada, Connecticut, and Montana.
An emerald's value is determined by four main factors including carat weight, color, cut, and its clarity.
An emerald's hardness is determined by the Mohs scale to be between 7.5 and 8. A diamond is 10 while turquoise is between 5 and 6.
Emeralds are thought to enhance love and commitment while also promoting healing.
Some of the most famous emeralds include the Chalk Emerald, Duke of Devonshire Emerald, Gachala Emerald, Mogul Mughal Emerald, Patricia Emerald, Bahia Emerald, and the Emerald of Saint Louis.
Calcite comes in many different shapes and colors which makes it a popular choice among collectors.
Found in over 300 different shapes, calcite has more different shapes than any other mineral.
Calcite is commonly used to make cement.
Although calcite can come in many dark colors, its streak is always white or light-colored.
Limestone, which is used in chalk, is made of calcite.
Calcite is used in optical instruments because it has the ability to make objects appear doubled.
It is very common to find calcite in the shells of certain marine animals.
A distinctive characteristic of calcite is that it bubbles when exposed to a weak acid.
When large, underwater rocks containing calcite are exposed to acid, they dissolve and make caves.
Calcite can be found in various countries in the world including Mexico, the US, England, India, and Germany.
Calcite in the form of limestone is used to make dog food.
Sea organisms whose shells are made of calcite help balance the amount of CO2 in the ocean by absorbing it to make their calcite shells.
Calcite is an example of a fluorescent mineral in that it can emit light when connected to a non-visible UV light.
Calcite is also phosphorescent in that after being disconnected from a non-visible UV light, it still glows.
Calcite also emits light when it is heated much like steel.
Marble and slate are examples of metamorphic rock.
Metamorphic rock is formed under extreme pressure combined with heat over time.
Metamorphic rocks are so called because they always begin as another type of rock.
When slate forms, some of the clay from the original rock is replaced by the mineral mica.
Metamorphic rock can originate not only as igneous and sedimentary rock but also other types of metamorphic rock.
During contact metamorphism, broken down pieces of rock near the Earth's surface is altered by magma.
During regional metamorphism, rocks buried deep within the Earth are altered by magma chambers.
Foliated rocks are types of metamorphic rock that have parallel bands of grain.
Non-foliated rocks are types of metamorphic rock that have no arrangement or bands of grain.
Marble is a type of metamorphic rock that originates from limestone.
Schist is a type of metamorphic rock that can originate from slate which is another type of metamorphic rock.
The word metamorphic literally means "changed form".
Slate, a metamorphic rock, can form from shale, clay or mudstone.
The Taj Mahal in India is made entirely of different types of marble, a metamorphic rock.
Serpentine is a type of metamorphic rock that originates as the igneous rock periodite.
Sedimentary rocks are extremely important resources that give us clues about the Earth's past.
Sedimentary rock has layers of sediments that are arranged according to their density.
Compaction is the process by which sediments form sedimentary rock.
Cementation is the process of minerals dissolving and then holding the particles together in a sedimentary rock.
The process by which sediments harden to form sedimentary rock is called lithification.
Fossils of organisms become buried over time and are often found in sedimentary rock.
Sedimentary rocks are divided among three different groups based on their composition and texture.
Classic sedimentary rock forms when older rocks break down and become compacted together.
Examples of classic sedimentary rock include sand-stone and breccia.
Sand-stone is a sedimentary rock that has been used to make housewares since prehistoric times.
Organic sedimentary rock has a high amount of organic material and can be used as a source of petroleum and tar.
Examples of organic sedimentary rock include limestone and coal.
Chemical sedimentary rock forms when minerals come out of a solution and crystallize.
The majority of chemical sedimentary rock comes from minerals left behind by evaporated water.
An example of chemical sedimentary rock includes halite which is also known as table salt.
Sandstone is found in a variety of places depending on its type.
Brownstone, a type of sandstone, was used to build homes in certain areas after the Civil War.
Sandstone is a type of sedimentary rock.
Sandstone has been used to make housewares since prehistoric time.
Sandstone is a versatile building structure and has been used to construct buildings, statues, and fountains.
Sandstone is popular in constructing buildings because it is resistant to weathering.
Sandstone can form under the sea or on land.
It is common to find natural gas in sandstone because sandstone is porous and traps it.
Grindstone wheels, which are used for sharpening, are made of sandstone.
Sandstone can be categorized into three groups: arkosic, quartzose, and argillaceous.
Because sandstone is porous it can serve as a filter in nature by filtering out pollutants from running water.
Sandstone is often broken down and used as industrial sand.
Groundwater can be transported by underground sandstone.
Underground sandstone is drilled and pumped as a good source for groundwater.
Sandstone rock can take thousands of years to form.
Stalactites and stalagmites in caves are leftover limestone that remains after water evaporates.
You will rarely find limestone in its pure white nature because it almost always has some impurities.
Limestone can be found in just about any color depending upon which elements are combined with the calcium carbonate in the rock.
Limestone is often used in construction such as being added to paint as a thickening agent.
When roofing styles have texture, it is normally because of crushed limestone being added to the roofing tar.
Animals can largely benefit from having limestone in their diet so it is often added to their feed.
Limestone can most abundantly be found in the shallow ends of marine water.
Chalk is a type of limestone that contains mostly shells from marine animals.
During the 1700s, limestone was used for lithography which is when pictures are drawn on stones and then copied to other stones.
Because limestone contains the remains of dead organisms, it is considered an organic sedimentary rock.
There are rare chemical sedimentary rocks that form from the precipitation of calcium carbonate from ocean water.
Lithographic limestone is a type of limestone that contains fossils.
Powered limestone is used in coal mines as a safety precaution because it absorbs pollutants.
Limestone can also be used on roofs to prevent or reduce weather or heat related roof damage.
Limestone turns into the metamorphic rock marble when subjected to high amounts of pressure and heat.
Marble is primarily white but can come in other colors as well.
Back in ancient times, you could easily tell where a piece of marble came from by looking at its color.
Marble has been used to make statues and provide flooring since ancient times.
Plaster fresco has been used as a marble replacement when marble is too expensive to use.
The Taj Mahal in India is made entirely of marble.
Marble is a type of metamorphic rock.
Marble usually originates as limestone or dolomite.
Calcite, dolomite crystals, and aragonite are the key components of marble.
Impurities are what gives marble its color.
Marble is typically found among other metamorphic rock such as gneiss and mica schist.
Marble usually lays among the oldest part of the Earth's crust.
Different varieties of obsidian rock get their names from their appearance.
The appearance of obsidian is based on the chemical composition of the magma that cooled to make the rock.
Obsidian is also known as "nature's glass" because of its glassy appearance.
When obsidian breaks, the fractures are very sharp which is why it was used as tools in the Stone Age.
Seventy percent of obsidian rock is made of silica.
Obsidian can only form near active volcanoes.
Sometimes obsidian is erupted directly from a volcano.
The best obsidian is formed underground near a volcanic vent because those rocks will have limited impurities.
Obsidian flows are so slow that often other obsidian flows will occur on top of each other causing a streaked appearance in the obsidian rock.
Tiny gas bubbles that trap water are a part of every obsidian rock.
Although most rocks that form in the Earth's crust are very old, obsidian is rarely older than 20 million years old which is young for a rock.
Obsidian goes through a process called devitrification whereby it turns from glass to a rock.
Obsidian is commonly used during surgical procedures because it is often sharper than traditional surgical tools.
Obsidian is used as a gemstone in jewelry.
Quartz and olivine are not usually part of andesite. However, it is rich in plagioclase feldspar minerals, and may include biotite, pyroxene, or amphibole.
Andesite, along with diorite, are commonly found in the continental crust above subduction zones formed after an oceanic plate melts producing a source of magma.
Andesite is a fine-grained igneous rock that forms when the magma erupts onto the surface and then crystalizes quickly.
The composition of andesite is intermediate between basalt and granite. The granite comes from the melting rocks as it is mixed with granitic magma.
The source of the rock's name, andesite, comes from the Andes Mountains of South America as lava flows mixed in with ash and tuff deposits on the flanks of stratovolcanoes.
These type of stratovolcanoes can be found above subduction zones in many locations including Central America, Mexico, Oregon, and Washington, as well as the Aleutian Arc, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, the Caribbean, New Zealand, and other places.
Andesite can also form at ocean ridges and hot spots in the ocean from the partial melting of basaltic rocks. It can form during eruptions at continental plate interiors and many other environments.
Sometimes, andesite will contain grains of plagioclase, amphibole, or pyroxene, which are large crystals known as phenocrysts, which begin forming when magma is at cooling depths. This causes the andesite porphyry to grow to visible sizes before the magma erupts.
Andesite porphyry is used as the name for the rocks with the two crystal sizes. Large crystals that formed slowly at depth and small crystals formed quickly at the surface.
When gas-charged andesitic magmas erupt it, they cause many volcanic plumes and ash eruptions. The pressure of the gas causes the eruptions, and then blows large amounts of tiny rock and magma particles into the air and carried long distances by the wind. They may also cause problems for aircraft downwind from the volcano.
Catastrophic eruptions produced by andesitic magmas include Mount St. Helens, Pinatubo, Redoubt, and Novarupta, which resulted in large amounts of dissolved gas under pressure.
Sometimes the formal definition of andesite is problematic since many authors are in perfect agreement to their chemical and mineralogical compositions.
The classification of an igneous rock like andesite may not be precise at first glance, since they may require closer examination and require chemical or mineralogical analysis, which may not be readily available, practical, or affordable.
If a person is not sure a rock is andesite, and only appears as andesite, it may be called an "andesitoid" rock, but could later be proven wrong using closer microscopic examination or chemical testing.
The word basalt comes from a Latin word meaning very hard stone.
Though basalt is typically a dark, black rock, weathering can lead to a yellow-brown color.
Basalt may also be found in various shades because of geochemical processes.
A light-color basalt is rare, but can be found due to a high concentration of plagioclase and weathering.
Basalt is also an abundant rock found on the Moon with much of its surface underlain by basaltic lava flows and flood basalts as well, with the areas known as "lunar maria."
Resurfacing of the Moon in large areas has taken place due to extensive basaltic flows which may have been triggered by major impact events. The ages of the areas can be measured by observing the density of impact craters. Older flows will have more craters.
Olympus mons, a shield volcano on Mars, was formed from basaltic lava flows. It is the largest known volcano in the solar system and the highest mountain on Mars.
Three rock-forming environments is responsible for most of the basalt formed on Earth: oceanic divergent boundaries, oceanic hotspots, and mantle plumes and hotspots beneath continents.
Most basalt is formed by the divergent plate boundaries on the mid-ocean ridge system. Convection currents deliver hot rock from deep in the mantle, which melts as this boundary pulls apart, and the molten rock erupts onto the floor of the ocean.
Significant amounts of basalt are produced in above-ocean hotspots. At these locations a small plume of rock rises up through the mantle from a hotspot on Earth's core. The Hawaiian Islands are an example of these basaltic volcanoes.
Production of basalt at these island locations begins with an eruption on the ocean floor. A sustained hotspot and repeated eruptions results in a larger and larger volcanic cone leading to an island.
The island of "Hawaii", is between 300,000 and 600.000 years old and began as an eruption on the floor of the Pacific Ocean. The cone grew following many eruptions and layer after layer of basalt flows.
There are also Colorado River Flood Basalts, which are an extensive sequence of layers of lava flow reaching a thickness of up to 6,000 feet.
A continental environment is where a mantle plume or hotspot delivers large amounts of basaltic lava through the continental crust and up to the Earth's surface. Eruptions can occur over millions of years producing layers of basalt vertically.
Examples of other flood basalts include those in Washington, Oregon, and Idaho; the Emeishan Traps of China, the Deccan traps of India, and several others.
Basalt is used to create cobblestone, by artists to create statues, for groundwork construction, and for building blocks.
Gabbro color depends on its texture and on the environment where the rock is found. It is not a reliable property because it may change within the rock.
The top layer of the oceanic crust is basaltic, but the deeper rocks of the oceanic crust is made up of gabbro.
On continents, slow cooling allows large crystals to form as it is found within thick lava flows of basaltic composition.
Gabbro also appears when deep plutons form as magma chambers feed basaltic eruptions and crystallize.
Gabbro is found underground close to volcanoes, and in the oceanic crust near mid-ridge spreading centers.
Large amounts of gabbro can be found beneath extensive flood basalts of the Columbia River in Washington, Oregon, and the Deccan Traps of India.
Long belts of gabbro intrusions may be formed at proto-rift zones and around ancient rift zone margins.
The use of gabbro, especially when it is polished to a bright and shiny black luster is used to make cemetery markers, countertops for kitchens, floor tiling, facing stone, and other such stone products.
Gabbro stands up quite well to weathering, wear, and tear, which makes it a highly desirable rock because it requires the least amount of maintenance compared to other types of rocks used for the same products.
In the commercial stone industry black granite is the name used for gabbro. The black granite is used for products such as curbing, ashlars, paving stones, and other products.
A common use for gabbro is as a crushed stone or aggregate, and as a base material for construction products, road construction, railroad ballast, and anywhere else crushed stone is needed as a fill.
Gabbro may also contain very small amounts of some rare metals such as the mineral ilmenite, nickel, chromium, or platinum.
Occasionally gabbro rocks may contain cobalt, gold, or silver; but the amount depends on the individual minerals that formed each deposit.
The term gabbro was initially used in the 1760s. It referred to a set of rocks found in the ophiolites of the Apennine Mountains in Italy.
The term gabbro comes from a small village named Gabbro, located in a municipality of Tuscany.
Granite is the most abundant rock in the continental crust of the Earth. It is exposed in cores of many mountain ranges in large areas known as batholiths and in core areas of continents known as shields.
The mineral crystals show that it cooled slowly from molten rock material, occurring beneath the Earth's surface, and requiring a long period of time.
If granite is exposed at the Earth's surface, it occurred because the granite rocks were uplifted and the overlying sedimentary rocks were eroded.
Beneath sedimentary rocks, granites, metamorphosed granites, or related rocks are usually beneath this cover. They are then known as basement rocks.
The definitions used for granite often lead to communication about the rock and sometimes causes confusion. There are multiple definitions sometimes used. There are actually three ways granite is defined.
In a simple course about rocks, granite may be defined as a coarse-grained, light igneous rock composed mainly of feldspars and quartz, along with mica and amphibole minerals.
A rock specialist will identify the exact composition of the rock, and many of the experts will not use granite to describe the rock unless it meets a certain percentage of minerals. They may call it an alkali granite, granodiorite, pegmatite, or aplite.
The commercial definition used by sellers and buyers usually call rocks with visible grains that are harder than marble as granite. They may call gabbro, basalt, pegmatite, gneiss, and many other rocks granite.
Granite's fame comes from many world-famous natural exposures including Stone Mountain, Georgia; Yosemite Valley, California; Pike's Peak, Colorado; and White Mountains, New Hampshire.
Granite is often defined as a "dimension stone" that can be cut into specific lengths, widths, and thicknesses.
Granite is tough enough to resist most abrasion, bear large weights, resist weathering, and can accept polish. It is a very desirable and useful stone.
Most granite in the United States comes from Idaho, New Hampshire, Georgia, Massachusetts, and South Dakota.
Granite has been used for thousands of years, in outside and inside environments as building material, bridges, paving, monuments, granite slabs, tiles, countertops, and many other places. In addition, it may be used as crushed stone in road construction.
Granite's cost is much higher than in price than other man-made materials for projects, but it is considered a prestige material, used to impress others because of its elegance, durability, and quality.
Crystals of pegmatite grow large because of the extreme conditions of crystallization. Basically, the presence of residual water has allowed the magma to cool slowly to permit coarse crystal growth.
Complex pegmatites result because of the presence exotic volatiles such as chlorine, fluorine, and carbon dioxide.
The extreme conditions may produce crystals many feet in length and may weigh more than a ton.
An example of a very large crystal of spodumene is at the Etta Mine in South Dakota. It was 42 feet long, 5 feet in diameter, and yielded about 90 tons of spodumene.
Pegmatite also forms in small pockets along the margins of a batholith leading to pegmatite dikes. It will form from waters that separate from a magma in the late stages of crystallization.
The dikes and pockets are small in size, taking place underground following a dike or a small pocket. Pegmatites usually do not support large mining operations.
Rare elements concentrated in large crystals may make pegmatite a potential source of valuable ore. Pegmatite deposits may also contain gemstones, industrial minerals, and rare minerals.
Overall pegmatite rock has very few uses.
Pegmatite has limited use as an architectural stone and is sometimes encountered in a dimension stone quarry that is producing granite.
Pegmatite, if sound and appealing, might be cut into slabs, polished, and used for building facades, countertops, tile, or other decorative stone products.
Pegmatite is most often sold commercially as a granite product.
The gemstones found in pegmatite include apatite, aquamarine, beryl, emerald, garnet, topaz, zircon, kunzite, and many others. Many are excellent-quality and are large crystals.
Pegmatite is the host rock for numerous mineral deposits and can be the commercial sources of beryllium, bismuth, tin, titanium, tungsten, niobium, and many other elements.
Large sheets of mica are often mined from pegmatite and used to make components electronic devices, circuit boards, optical filters, detector windows, and many other products.
Pegmatite is also used as a primary ingredient for making glass and ceramics, and as a filler for many other products.
Pegmatites occur in all parts of the world and are the most abundant in rocks of relatively great geologic age.
The word peridotite comes from the gemstone peridot consisting of pale green olivine.
Different igneous rocks are considered to be a part of the peridotite family including: lherzolite, harzburgite, dunite, wehrlite, and kimberlite. Most are greenish in color.
The minerals that compose peridotite are mostly high-temperature and are unstable at the Earth's surface, quickly altered by weathering and hydrothermal solutions.
Those that are stable at the Earth's surface contain magnesium-oxide bearing minerals that can alter to form carbonates such as magnesite or calcite.
Alteration of other peridotites forms serpentinite, chlorite, and talc.
When peridotite isolates carbon dioxide into a stable solid, it occurs when the gas mixes with magnesium-rich olivine to form magnesite. The reaction happens at a geologically rapid rate.
The peridotites on the Earth's surface are thought to be rocks that have been brought up from deep-source magmas by structures such as ophiolites and pipes. It is also found in the igneous rocks of sills and dikes.
The studies of these ophiolites have helped geologists better understand the process of seafloor spreading and the formation of oceanic lithosphere.
Pipes from when a deep-source volcanic eruption brings magma up from the mantle and they are the origin for most of the Earth's diamond deposits.
The dikes and sills that are composed of peridotites are exposed by erosion providing another way for this rocks observation at the Earth's surface.
Diamonds that are delivered to the Earth's surface are in pieces of rock known as xenoliths. The formation of these diamonds take place at very high temperatures 100 miles below the surface.
Some peridotites contain significant amounts of chromite forming when a subsurface of magma slowly crystallizes.
At the early stages of crystallization, high-temperature minerals such as olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, and chromite begin to melt. The minerals can form layers of peridotite on the bottom of the magma body, and up to 50% of the rock can be chromite.
Peridotite on the Earth's surface can be quickly obscured by soil, sediment, glacial till, and vegetation.
Peridotite often has magnetic properties significantly different from surrounding rocks and a magnetic survey can be used to locate them.
Geologists can locate peridotite bodies by prospecting for chromite, garnet, and other resistant indicator minerals. The peridotite weathers and the olivine breaks down resulting in the minerals.
Because of its potential use for isolating carbon dioxide, scientists are investigating its use to store carbon dioxide that are responsible for global warming, though it may be too costly.
Pumice cools so quickly that atoms in the melt are unable to arrange themselves into a crystalline structure, resulting in an amorphous volcanic glass known as a "mineraloid."
At rare times, pumice can erupt from gas-charged magmas of basaltic and andesitic composition.
Following the enormous rush of high-pressure gas from the vent of a volcano, the magma shreds and is blown out as a molten froth, it then solidifies as it flies through the air falling to the Earth as pumice.
The size of pumice can range from tiny dust particles to pumice pieces the size of a house. Many cubic kilometers of pumice can be ejected during large volcanic eruptions.
The volcanic eruption at Mount Pinatubo in 1991 resulted in a cubic mile of ash and pumice lapilli being released into the atmosphere and falling to the surface blanketing the countryside.
The eruption of Mount Mazama over 7,500 years ago started as a single vent as a towering column of pumice and ash that reached 30 miles into the air. The area's valleys around the mountain filled with up to 300 feet of pumice and ash.
There have been instances of large amounts of pumice being produced by some island and subsea eruptions that will float on the surface and then pushed by the winds.
Pumice can float for very long periods of time, some floating for years before becoming waterlogged and sinking.
Large masses of floating pumice are able to be tracked by satellites and are referred to as "pumice rafts." They can be a hazard to ships that sail through them.
Pumice use in the United States is most often used for the production of lightweight concrete blocks and other concrete products. The concrete is mixed and the vesicles remain partially filled with air.
Lighter building blocks of pumice reduce the structural steel requirements of buildings, as well as the trapped air also giving the blocks a greater insulating value.
Pumice is also used in landscaping and horticulture used as a decorative ground cover in landscaping and planters.
Pumice is also used as drainage rock and soil conditioner in plantings, and as a popular rock, along with scoria, for use as substrates in hydroponic gardening.
Other minor uses of pumice are included abrasives in conditioning in stone-washed denim, in some bar and liquid soaps, in pencil erasers, in skin exfoliating products, and in polishing substances.
Pumice is also used as a traction material on snow-covered roads, traction enhancer in tire rubber, absorbent in cat litter, and many other minor uses.
In 2011, there was about 500,000 metric tons of pumice and pumicite mined in the United States, mostly in Oregon, Nevada, and Idaho, and other states west of the Mississippi River.
The formation of rhyolite usually takes place in continental or continent-margin volcanic eruptions where the granitic magma reaches the surface. It rarely is produced during oceanic eruptions.
Due to the spontaneous release of large amounts of trapped gases, the eruptions of rhyolite may be highly explosive.
The eruptions not only produce rhyolite, but also can produce pumice, obsidian, or tuff. They all have similar compositions but different cooling conditions.
Effusive eruptions produce the rhyolite or the obsidian if the lava cools rapidly, but all the rocks can be found following a single eruption.
Rhyolite will often appear very uniform in texture, although lava flow structures may be evident.
Granitic eruptions, which are rich in silica, are rare and only three of them have occurred since 1900: St. Andrew Strait Volcano in Papua New Guinea, Novarupta Volcano in Alaska, and Chaiten Volcano in Chile.
Slow rhyolitic lava piles up around a vent as it slowly exudes from a volcano, and as a result, produces a mound-shaped structure called a "lava dome."
Gem deposits, such as red beryl, topaz, agate, jasper, and opal are sometimes hosted in rhyolite.
The thick granitic lava that forms rhyolite cools quickly, and pockets of gas remain trapped inside of the lava, eventually forming the vugs, where the materials precipitate as ground water or hydrothermal gases move through.
Rhyolite is rarely used in construction or manufacturing because it is too fractured with too many cavities, though it may be used in cements.
Rhyolite rocks have a hardness of 6 according to Mohs scale of hardness.
Rhyolite is sometimes used as crushed stone when other better materials are not available.
In the past, stone tools, scrapers, blades, hoes, axe heads, and projectiles points have been produced by ancient peoples using rhyolite, but most likely out of necessity.
The silica content of rhyolite is usually between 60% to 77%.
Rhyolite has the mineralogical composition of granite.
Rhyolite rocks can be found in many countries including New Zealand, Germany, Iceland, India, and China, and the deposits can be found near active or extinct volcanoes.
Magma containing abundant dissolved gas flows from a volcano or is blown out during an eruption results in the formation of scoria.
If molten rock solidifies before the gas escapes, the bubbles become small rounded or elongated cavities, which leads to scoria being produced.
The bodies that solidify in the air and become scoria produces ground cover all around the volcano vent with the heaviest deposits on the downwind side.
Scoria has an angle of repose of 30 to 40 degrees, which is very steep due to the small volcanoes produced by brief eruptions with a vertical relief less than a few thousand feet.
Sometimes newly erupted lava flows contain abundant dissolved gas, and once lava starts to solidify, the trapped gas bubbles are the vesicles, and if the upper portion has an abundant number of vesicles, it is often called scoria.
Pumice is very similar to scoria that is also a vesicular igneous rock, but there are a few differences that can distinguish them.
Scoria is usually always black or dark gray to reddish brown and pumice is white to light gray or light tan, due to their composition differences.
Pumice has a higher concentration of trapped bubbles allowing it to float, but thick walls of scoria make it heavy enough to sink.
Using a hand lens, a person can often see very tiny mineral crystals in scoria.
The production of lightweight aggregate is one of the main uses of scoria. It is crushed to the specific sizes and sold for a variety of uses.
Using concrete with scoria weighs about 100 pounds per cubic foot, but with typical sand and gravel it would weigh about 150 pounds per cubic foot.
The lighter scoria allows buildings to be constructed with less structural steel, and the air trapped in the scoria makes the concrete a better insulator resulting in lower heating and cooling costs.
Crushed scoria is used for ground cover in landscape projects, as a substrate in hydroponic gardening, and as roofing granules.
Buyers have the option of purchasing black, brown, or red material.
In addition, scoria may be used as rip-rap, drainage stone, or low-quality road metal. Small amounts of it can be used as sauna rock and as a heat sink in barbecue grills.
There are also scoria substitutes such as a lightweight aggregate that is produced by heating shale in a rotating kiln under controlled conditions.
Substitute scoria can have the same properties, appearances, and vesicles as the original, which is sold under the name "expanded clay,", or "grow rocks."
Metamorphic rocks are formed by the heating of pre-existing rocks. The heat provided to a rock changes the mineralogical and physical changes which are called metamorphic rocks.
Amphibolite erodes over a long period of time. Wind erosion, sea erosion, glacier erosion and chemical erosion are all types of erosion that effect amphiboles.
The highest quality of amphibolite is quarried for specific uses in architectural design
Amphibolite often has features that are smooth to the touch, matrix variable, and shiny looking.
Because amphibolite is harder than limestone and heavier than granite, it is quarried and crushed and used for highway and railroad construction.
According to a variety of features like texture, appearance, hardness, streak, toughness, and resistance, an amphibolite is used for various antiquity uses such as artifacts, sculpture and small figurines.
Amphibolite is often used commercially in cemetery markers, commemorative tablets, and creating artwork
Amphibolite is used for exterior building stones, facing stones, curbing, and paving stone.
Amphibolite is used for interior countertops, entryways, floor tiles, and in hotels and kitchens.
When the presence of hydroxyl groups is found in the structure of amphiboles, it decreases their thermal stability relative to the more refractory (heat-resistant) pyroxenes.
Amphiboles have hydroxyl groups in their structure and are considered to be hydrous silicates that are stable only in hydrous environments where water can be found and incorporated into the structure
Most often, amphiboles form as asbestiform (fibrous) aggregates, radiating sprays, and long prismatic crystals.
Amphibolite can crystallize in igneous and metamorphic rocks with a wide range of bulk chemistries because of the large range of chemical substitutions allowed in the crystal structure.
According to the British mineralogist Bernard E. Leake, there are 5 major groups of amphibole that leads to 76 chemically defined compositions.
Amphibole, originates from the Greek word amphibolos, meaning "ambiguous," and was named by the famous French crystallographer and mineralogist Rene'-Just Hauy (1801)
The deposits of tuffs can be hundreds of miles thick and the total volume of eruption can be many cubic miles. That thickness can be from a single or multiple eruptions over a long period of time.
A small volcanic cone of low relief that surrounds a shallow crater is called a tuff ring. The craters are known as maars and are formed by explosions caused by the contact between cold groundwater and hot magma. The ring forms as the materials fall back to the Earth.
Welded tuff is rock formed when ejecta is hot enough when it lands and the particles are soft and sticky. The ejected particles are welded together. The deposits may be near the vent and "unwelded" tuff at a distance where colder, smaller particles fell to the ground.
A broad range of materials is often referred to as tuff. Often the only requirement is that the materials were produced by a volcanic eruption.
Tuff may contain different sizes of particles, from dust-sized to boulder-sized particles and be composed of many different types of materials.
A large number of tuff deposits may contain fragments unrelated to volcanic activity. The involvement comes from volcanic explosions occurring below the ground.
Numerous tuff deposits form from magma with a rhyolitic composition, but basaltic, andesitic, and other types of magma might contribute to the tuff.
Tuffs are usually significantly altered in composition and texture after deposition. The alteration may begin with the stewing of a hot ash layer in its own gases and condensed fluids, or outside water added to hot ash.
Tuff rocks may be found in the Northwest of the United States, much of Washington and Oregon as a result of the Mount St. Helens explosion. Other areas include New Zealand, Easter Island, Greece, and Peru.
Tuff has been used as a building material since ancient times because it is easy to work with and relatively soft.
In the past large carvings were made from tuff, and there are famous statues on Easter Island made from tuff.
Tuff is common in Italy and the Romans used it for buildings and bridges. Romans also thought bees nested in tuff.
When tuff forms from a hot ash flow it can create shells around object or people.
The Mt. Vesuvius eruption and tuff resulted in the preserved shapes and postures of the people that were trapped by the eruption and covered ash.
The nuclear waste repository located in the Yucca Mountain, a terminal storage facility for spent nuclear reactor and radioactive waste, is in tuff and ignimbrite
The structure of the hornfels is characterized by the small-grained mosaic make-up.
Hornfels are used in a number of applications like in the field of construction and landscaping. It is used as a decorative rock in gardens. In the olden times, it is used as a tool like scrapers and knives.
Hornfels is used as a road base and in concrete and is most often dark blue or almost a black color.
The interior use of hornfels is found in homes and businesses in the decorative aggregates, flooring, countertops, and bathrooms.
The exterior use of hornfels is viewed in building construction, paving stones, and a variety of gardening decorations.
In prehistoric times, hornfels was used to make simple tools such as knives, scrapers, and arrowheads.
Hornfels are defined by the physical properties such as hardness, strength, grain size, fracture, porosity, and streak. It is these physical properties that determine usage.
Because pressure is not a main factor in the formation of hornfels, and the texture is granular, platy or elongated crystals, there is a lack of foliation as often seen in many metamorphic rocks formed under high pressure.
During the formation of hornfels, the pre-existing rock is destroyed.
Hornfels are typically found only by microscopic observation and not witnessed by eye alone. However, under a microscope the structure becomes very distinctive revealing the small-grained mosaic design.
There is a second group of hornfels are called the calc-silicate hornfels which originate from the thermal alteration of impure limestone. These rocks are fine-grained, and even though they are often banded, they are tough and much harder than the original limestone.
Hornfels have the ability to resonate when struck. The stones in South Africa are called "ring-stones" due to their ability to ring like a bell after being struck with an object.
98% of the entire world's iron ore is made into steel which accounts for over 90% of all metals used in the world.
Once iron ore is made into steel, it is used to create machinery, nails, bolts, engines, ships, cars, tools, and pipes to name a few items.
The very first iron ore deposits were made in Australia and made in 1880.
Australia is the highest ranking seaborne supplier of iron ore to the overall global iron and steel markets.
According to the Reserve Bank of Australia, household income across Australia was 13% higher thanks to the iron ore mining industry.
The unemployment rate was 1.2% lower than it would have been without the mining of iron ore.
Real wages in Australia were 6% higher due to the iron ore industry
Since 2006, there have been $117 billion in taxes and royalties paid by the iron ore and minerals miners.
Once the iron ore embargo was lifted in 1960, large deposits were found in Western Australia which resulted in new iron ore ports, thousands of miles of railway lines, new towns were built, jobs were created and a general increase in the Western Australian population.
Iron ore has contributed to more than $70 billion in royalties and taxes just since 2008.
In Australia alone, iron ore earned $75 billion in exports in 2014.
The iron ore industry employees close to 60,500 Australians.
Australia is the largest iron ore exporter with some of the major markets being Korea, Japan, and China.
There was $5.2 billion paid to Washington State for iron ore royalties in 2014.
Mining iron ore is a high volume low margin business because the value of iron is predominately lower than other base metals. As a result, iron ore production is largely concentrated into the hands of a few major extractors, with Australia being the largest.
World-wide production of iron ore averages around 2 billion tons of raw ore annually.
Over the last 40 years, iron ore prices have been decided behind closed doors negotiations between a small number of miners and steelmakers.
Novaculite has been used for making cutting weapons and tools for thousands of years. Today they are still used as a tool to sharpen metal cutting tools and weapons.
Because Novaculite is a cryptocrystalline variety of quartz, it is very dense, fine-grained and has an extremely uniformed texture.
As a variety of quartz, it has a hardness of 7 which is harder than that of steel.
European settlers and Native Americans valued this rock for the many uses it provided.
Native Americans were the first people to mine for novaculite in the Arkansas Novaculite Formation.
Native Americans not only used novaculite for cutting tools, but they also traded the materials to surrounding areas.
Of the Native American tribes, the Natchez, Chickasaw, Tunica, Caddo, Osage, and Quapaw were the first to mine the novaculite.
Arkansas novaculite is used especially for sharpening stones and comes in three different textures. The white stone has a course texture for initial sharpening, the mottled stone is used for resharpening, and the black stone has a very fine texture for honing an unsharpened edge.
These stones are used with a drop of oil which will lubricate the strokes across the stone. This prevents the metal shavings from clogging the pores of the stone.
Each sharpening stones is made to be about 2 inches wide and about six inches in length and about 1/2 inch in thickness.
The most famous location where novaculite is found in central Arkansas and southeastern Oklahoma. The rock units found there range from 60 feet thick to about 900 feet thick.
Compared to other kinds of rocks, novaculite is extraordinarily resistant to both weathering and chemical changes.
Since there are relatively no changes to novaculite over time, they form ridges and cliffs in the Ouachita Mountains and become very pronounced landscape features.
Novaculite is many times a highly fractured rock that can be used as a suitable aquifer for private water wells and water supplies.
Once European settlers discovered that novaculite could be used to sharpen metal, they began producing sharpening tools and trading those to all distant partners expanding the use of novaculite to an even broader area.
As sharpening stones became famous, the demand for novaculite in the 1800's was strong. However, in the early 1900's demand began to decline as artificial abrasives and sharpening machines began to be produced.
Breccia is very similar to conglomerate. The main difference is the fragments in breccia have not been rounded by the action of moving water as in a conglomerate.
Silica, calcite and iron oxides are the most common cementing minerals.
There are many compositions of Breccia. The composition is determined by the mineral material and rock that the angular fragments were produced from.
The composition of breccia can be influenced by the climate.
The type of rock that the fragments were produced from is often used as an adjective in the name of the rock. For example: granite breccia, sandstone breccia, granite breccia, basalt breccia and chert breccia.
When a breccia contains many types of rock fragments, they are known as polymict breccias or polymictic breccias. For example, a breccia that contains clasts of multiple types of limestone is referred to as a limestone breccia.
Breccia can be a colorful rock. The colors of the matrix or cement, along with the color of the rock fragments, determine its color.
This rock is used as architectural stones for paving stone, building stone, tiles, window sills, and interior building veneers.
The word breccia originated from the Italian language which means "loose gravel".
Sedimentary breccia may be formed by the debris flow of a submarine.
Fault breccia is produced by fracture and grinding during faulting and found within the fault plane.
When lavas pick up rock fragments, they can form volcanic breccia, also referred to as pillow breccias. When the crust of a lava flow is broken up during movement, it is called flow breccia.
An impact breccia is rocks composed of angular rock fragments from the impact of an android.
In today's world, chert has very few uses, but many ancient cultures used it to make tools for cutting and scraping and also used it to make weapons like arrowheads and ax heads. It is very hard and durable and the edges of chert are very sharp.
Chert is found in many colors. Most common colors are blue, green, red and yellow. White coloration usually indicates it contains carbonate impurities, while black indicates organic matter.
Darker color chert is often referred to as flint. It can be found in chalk or marly limestone formations and formed by a replacement of calcium carbonate with silica. It's commonly found as nodules.
Red to brown chert receive their color when it contains iron oxide and are then referred to as jasper. It is usually opaque to near opaque.
The most abundantly found variety of chert is "common chert". It is a variety of chert which forms in limestone formations by replacement of calcium carbonate with silica. It is considered to be less attractive for producing gem stones than flint.
When struck against steel, it produces a spark which results in heat. It makes an excellent tool for starting fires.
A primary historic use of chert and flint was to make a "flintlock gun". The firearm had a metal plate that produced a spark when struck with chert. It ignited a small reservoir containing black powder that discharged the firearm.
Chert was used in the late 1800's and early 1900's as grave markers or headstones.
Marble Bar Chert in Western Australia is considered one of the earliest and best preserved sedimentary successions on Earth.
About ten feet of plant debris will produce one foot of coal. Since plant debris accumulates very slowly, it could take thousands of years fifty feet of plant debris to turn into a five-foot-thick seam of coal. During that time, the water level must be stable. If too deep, the swamp will drown and if too shallow, the plants will decay. In order for a coal seam to be formed, the water level must be maintained for a long period of time.
Anthracite is a shiny, hard, black coal that burns with a smokeless blue flame. Most forms of coal are associated with sedimentary rock, but anthracite undergoes metamorphism and is linked to metamorphic rocks.
Coal is widely used today in power stations today to make electricity. With less polluting and lower cost technologies arising, coal is becoming less popular in power plants to hydroelectricity and natural gas.
In the United States, coal is primarily used to produce electricity. It is transported to a power plant, crushed and then burned. The heat from the burning coal is used to produce steam. The steam is used to spin a turbine which is connected to an electrical generator. The mechanical energy transforms into electric energy.
Most electricity consumed today in the United States is made by burning coal.
When coal is heated under controlled conditions in the absence of air, coke is produced. This process drives off some of the volatile materials and concentrates on the carbon content. Coke is used for metal processing and for other uses when a hot burning flame is needed.
Coal is used in manufacturing plastics, synthetic rubber, linoleum, insecticides, medicines, solvents and paint products to name a few.
Coal can be converted into liquid form and gaseous fuels; however, these uses of coal are experimental and not common.
The world's top producer of coal is China. Other large producers are United States, India, Europe and Australia.
Up until a few decades ago, most coal was used for space heating. While it is still used that way, other fuels and coal-produced electricity are used instead.
Coal mining and burning of coal can have bad effects on the environment. Examples of this include acid rain and smog. Those toxins leaked into the air then lead to numerous respiratory effects and increased risks of lung cancer for coal plant workers.
Conglomerate is closely related to sandstone and displays many of the same types of sedimentary structures. Sandstone is a notably popular building material, used for things like flagstones and tile.
Conglomerate rocks are colorful and attractive; however, it is rarely used as ornamental stone for interior use because of its unreliable physical strength and durability.
Conglomerate has very few commercial uses, though it can be crushed to make a fine aggregate that can be used when a low-performance material is needed.
Conglomerate forms where sediments of rounded clasts at least two millimeters in diameter accumulate. Because of the large size of the clasts, it takes a very strong water current to transport and shape the rocks. As they tumble through the running water or moving waves, they form their rounded shape.
These rocks can be found in sedimentary rock sequences of all ages. They probably make up less than one percent by weight of all sedimentary rocks.
When the gravel clasts in a conglomerate are separated from each other and contain more matrix than clasts, it is called a paraconglomerate. When they are in contact with each other, it is called a orthoconglomerate.
Similar sedimentary rocks that are composed of large angular clasts are referred to as breccia. While a conglomerate is composed of rounded clasts, breccia is composed of broken rocks or minerals.
NASA's Mars rover Curiosity discovered an outcrop of conglomerate on the surface of Mars in September 2012. This provided evidence to scientists that a stream once ran across the area where the rover was driving. The shape and sizes of the stones can offer clues to the distance and speed of the stream's flow.
Chalk cliffs are an excellent place for flint. When the chalk weathers away, flint nodules fall off.
When flint is struck against steel or two flintstones are struck together, they can produce a spark. For centuries, this was a way for people worldwide to made fire.
People carried a small box called a tinder box which had some flintstones and cloth, bark or sawdust. The hard flint edge shaves off a particle of steel that exposes iron which reacts with oxygen and can then ignite tinder.
Flints were also used to make a spark to fire a gun. This type of gun was called a flintlock gun and was introduced in the 17th century and continued to be popular for two centuries. They were used as a self-defense weapon and as a military arm. The firearm had a metal plate that produced a spark when struck with chert. It ignited a small reservoir containing black powder that discharged the firearm. Their effective range was short and misfires were often.
Because it is very durable and weather resistant, flintstones have been used in facing walls in homes and buildings in some countries where flint is more abundant. In England, builders broke the stones to show the inside to give buildings a glassy finish instead of a dull finish that stones would have made.
In prehistoric times, flint was used to make axes, knives, scraping tools and spearheads. Their survival depended upon having a durable material that could be used to produce sharp tools. Flint was used discovered and utilized by Stone Age people in almost every early culture located where flint was easily found. Their survival depended upon having this durable material that could be used to produce sharp tools and weapons. It these tools were broken or damaged in use, they were reshaped into smaller tools.
When polished, flint is very attractive and colorful. For many years, it has been used to make colorful jewelry beads for necklaces, bracelets and also beautiful gemstones for pins, belt buckles and pendants.
Muscovite is not resistant to chemical weathering. It can quickly transform into clay minerals as tiny flakes can sometime survive long enough to be incorporated into immature sedimentary rocks and sediments.
Muscovite can form during regional metamorphism of argillaceous rocks. Clay minerals transform into tiny grains of mica during the heat and pressure of metamorphism and enlarge as metamorphism progresses.
When the mineral takes on an apple green color, it is known as "fuschite". This occurs when chromium substitutes for aluminum in muscovite. When the rock has a distinct green color, the name "verdite" is used.
In the 1700s, Pegmatites were mined in Russia. They split the mineral into transparent sheets and used them as a cheaper alternative to glass in windows. It was called "muscovy glass".
Manufacturers use ground mica to make rubber. In tires and roofing, it acts as an anti sticking agent.
Dry-ground mica is also used as an anti-stick agent on asphalt shingles. It stands up well to weather and does not absorb the asphalt.
Mica is used as an additive to drilling mud which assists in sealing porous sections of the drill hole to reduce circulation loss.
Mica is added to paint as a pigment extender which reduces chalking and brightens the tone of colored pigments.
In joint compound, mica serves as a filler which makes it easier to work with and reduces cracking in the finished product.
Mica is added to plastic to serve as an agent to absorb vibration and sound.
Due to the mineral's pearlescent luster, it is also commonly used as "glitter" in cosmetics, such as lipstick, eye shadow and nail polish.
Sheet mica is used to electronic devices such as medical electronics, radar systems and oxygen breathing equipment.
In 2011, the United States produced about 50,000. China produced 700,000 tons, being the largest producer and largest consumer.
Due to prices being high for this material, substitutes are being used. Creation of synthetic micas are created in laboratories to use as substitutes, such as polyester, nylon and fiberglass.
When sheets of mica have inclusions of hematite, rutile or magnetite, they are often sold at a reduced price to use for low-quality windows for ovens and furnaces.
Phyllite is associated with regional metamorphism due to mountain building. It is commonly found in the Dalradian Metasediments of northwest Arran.
Phyllite is primarily composed of quartz, sericite, mica, and chlorite.
Continued metamorphism converts clay minerals into large grains of mica, along with quartz and feldspar. At that point, phyllite becomes schist.
The word phyllite comes from the Greek word phyllon meaning "leaf".
The parent rocks for phyllite is shale or pelite, or slate and are not usually visible with the naked eye.
Phyllite is often found as black to gray, or light greenish gray in color. It has a crinkled or wavy appearance as its foliation.
Phyllite is a durable and soft rock.
Phyllite may be used as decorative aggregates, floor tiles, and other interior home decorations or used as exterior building or facing stone, and garden decorations.
Other uses may include cemetery markers, commemorative tablets, creative artwork, and writing slates.
Phyllite is scaled between 1-2 on the Mohs Hardness scale and has a specific gravity or 2.72 - 2.73.
Phyllite has a resistance to heat, pressure, and water.
The mineral is usually colorless or white, but also may be purple, blue, pink, red, orange, yellow or gray depending on the amount and type of impurities.
Artificial Halite can easily be grown as crystals by allowing a saturated saltwater solution to evaporate.
Rock salt is often used on walkways, roads, driveways and steps in the wintery months to prevent them from icing over and to lesser the extent of snow buildup. Many municipalities will spread a mixture of sand and salt on roads to help improve the traction of vehicles when snow is forecasted.
Rock salt is also used as a seasoning for food and for making ice creams, as it lowers the freezing point when packed with ice in an ice cream maker, thus making the ice cream colder.
Farmers use rock salt as salt licks for cattle. It provides the cattle with salt which is essential to their health.
The Dead Sea in Israel and Jordan is slowly evaporating and the shoreline is continuously receding. The outcome has been large amounts of halite crystals to form at the water's edge.
In the United States, very large underground deposits exist and the salt is commercially mined in the states of Michigan, Ohio, New York, Kansas, Texas, Oklahoma and Louisiana.
Rock salt is also found in ancient bedrock all over the world where large extinct seas and salt lakes have evaporated millions of years ago, leaving behind thick deposits of salt.
Silt does not have a definite composition. It usually has a mixture of micas, feldspars, quartz, and clay minerals. The small fraction of silt is mostly clay. The coarse-size fraction is mostly grains of quartz and feldspar.
Mudstone and shale are rocks that contain mud, which is material that has a range of clay and silt. Siltstone is different because it is mostly silt and not clay.
Siltstone is much less common than shale and sandstone. The rocks are usually thinner and less extensive.
Silt accumulates in sedimentary basins all over the world. It represents a level of current, wind or wave energy between where mud and sand accumulate. These include aeolian, fluvial, tidal, lacustrine, coastal, glacial, paludal, deltaic, and shelf environments. Sedimentary structures such as layering, ripple marks, erosional contacts, cross-bedding, and fossils provide evidence of these environments.
The silt-sized particles range between 0.00015 and 0.0025 inches in diameter, or between 0.0039 and 0.063 millimeters in diameter. They are intermediate in size between coarse clay on the small side and fine sand on the large side.
The grains of coarse silt are large enough that most people can see them without using a magnifying glass.
Silt can be difficult to identify without close examination and requires breaking off a small piece to observe the grain size. Scraping the surface with a knife blade or nail will dislodge tiny silt grains instead of dislodging sand grains.
Experienced geologists and soil scientists have been known to detect a few grains of silt by biting them gently between their front teeth, though this test is not recommended.
Siltstone has very few uses. If used for building, it is only because of availability, not quality. Its main use is as a low-quality fill when better materials are not locally available.
Soapstone is primarily composed of talc. It shares many physical properties with that mineral and make it valuable for many different uses. It is non-porous, heat resistant, non-absorbent, soft and easy to carve, high specific heat capacity and resistant to acids and alkalis.
The mineral composition in this rock can vary. It depends upon the parent rock material and pressure/temperature conditions of its metamorphic environment.
The grain size is determined by the level of metamorphism. There are harder varieties that are more durable that are used for making countertops and there are some with a fine grain size that is desirable for high detailed carvings.
As early as 8,000 years ago, Native Americans used the rock to make carved sculptures and cooking bowls. In the Late Archaic Period, Native Americans from North America made bowls, smoking pipes, cooking slabs and ornaments.
During the Stone Age, people of Scandinavia used soapstone carved molds to cast metal objects such as knife blades and spearheads. They discovered they were able to heat soapstone and then radiate it slowly. This lead to them making cooking pots, bowls, hearth liners and cooking slabs out of soapstone.
The famous statue that overlooks the city of Rio de Janeiro, "Christ the Redeemer", is made of concrete and faced with soapstone. It weighs 635 metric tons and stands at 120 feet tall. The statue was created between 1922 - 1931. It has become a cultural icon.
During the Revolutionary War era, the military made bullet molds out of soapstone because it was easily carved and heat resistant.
Soapstone is often used as an insulator for housing and electrical components due to its electrical characteristics, durability and can be pressed into complex shapes before firing.
As an alternate natural stone kitchen countertop instead of marble or granite, soapstone is often used because it is not stained by tomatoes, grape juice or wine. It is even used in laboratories since it is unaffected by acids and alkalis. Soapstone is unaffected by heat, so a hot pot can be placed on it without fear of burning or damaging the surface.
When soapstone is rubbed against almost any object, it leaves a white streak since it is primarily made of talc. Seamstresses, carpenters and other craftsmen have been using soapstone as a marking tool for years because it marks are visible and easily removed. It is also used as a marker by welders during welding process because the powder is heat-resistant and does not burn away.
Small chilled soapstone can be used in place of ice in a glass of whiskey. It is ideal because it will not dilute the alcohol and a few stones can keep a drink cold for over 30 minutes because the temperature of the rock changes very slowly. Also because the rock is soft, it will not scratch the glass.